{\small Halpern \et (2000) published a study based on early Add Health data with the provocative title ``Smart Teens Don't Have Sex (or Kiss Much Either).'' Several following papers reported the same result, a positive correlation between the intelligence of adolescent girls. However, the causal mechanism has not been carefully investigated. Harden and Mendle (2011) also used Add Health data within a biometrical design, and found that the relationship between intelligence and age at first intercourse (AFI) was fully accounted for by shared environmental differences, suggesting at least the location of the causal mechanism -- the part of the household environment shared by siblings within the household that influences both child intelligence and AFI.

In this study, we use an intergenerational sibling comparison design to investigate the causal status of the link between intelligence and Age at First Intercourse (AFI), using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) data and the NLSY-Children/Young Adult data. We measured maternal IQ using the AFQT, and children IQ using PPVT, PIAT, and Digit Span, and age at first intercourse (AFI) using self report from the respondents themselves. We fit these measures using Kenny's (2001) reciprocal standard dyad model. This model supported analyses treating the data as only between-family data (as in past studies), and also allowed us to use within-family comparisons. These included two forms, first a comparison of offspring of mothers in relation to maternal IQ, then a comparison of offspring themselves in terms of offspring IQ. 

When we evaluate the relationship between both maternal and child intelligence, using a between-family design, we replicate the earlier results. When we use a within-family design, however, and compare offspring of sisters, and then compare the offspring themselves, the relationship between both maternal and child intelligence and AFI virtually disappears. The finding is robust across gender and intelligence assessment age. These results suggest that the cause of the intelligence-AFI link is not intelligence per se, but rather differences between families (such as parental education, SES, etc.) that correlate with family-level (but not individual-level) intelligence.}